Release notes for v0.1.13 (#1350)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/release_notes.md

# Release notes

## [v0.1.13](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/releases/tag/v0.1.13)

> ## Change default command to `repl` when no args are passed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Change the default sub-command to `repl` when no args are passed
```

> The `run` command is now no longer the default when no arguments are passed, starting from `0.1.13` Scala CLI run scala `repl` under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We no longer default to the `help` sub-command when no arguments are passed. Starting with `0.1.13` running  Scala CLI with no args will launch the `repl`.
```

```
$ scala-cli -S 3
Welcome to Scala 3.1.3 (17.0.3, Java OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM).
Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.

scala> 
```

> When inputs are provided, scala-cli uses the `run` command as default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When inputs are provided, Scala CLI defaults to the `run` sub-command, as before.
```

```
$ cat hello.sc
println("Hello World")
$ scala-cli hello.sc
Hello World
```

> This changed was added by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao) in [#1268]( https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1268)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change was added by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao) in [#1268]( https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1268)
```

> ## Optional project settings file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Marking the project's workspace root with the `project.settings.scala` file
```

> Scala CLI now adds support for the optional configuration file `project.settings.scala` which determines the root workspace directory. The settings file is recommended place to put most using directives (dependencies, scala version, options).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scala CLI now supports marking the workspace root directory with an optional configuration file: `project.settings.scala`.  The workspace root determines where the `.bsp` and `.scala-build` directories will be saved (which mostly affects what path should be opened in your IDE to import the Scala CLI project through BSP).

The settings file is also the recommended input for your project's `using directives`. Otherwise, it functions similarly to other `.scala` sources.
```

```
$ cat project.settings.scala
//> using scala "2.13.4"
$ cat hello.sc
println(util.Properties.versionString)
$ scala-cli hello.sc .
version 2.13.4
```

> To see how root directory is resolved see [this document](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/blob/932c942b78bc35fc0906f2f9e2f6a0c56bef712b/website/docs/reference/root-dir.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see how exactly is the root directory resolved, see [this document](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/blob/932c942b78bc35fc0906f2f9e2f6a0c56bef712b/website/docs/reference/root-dir.md)
```

Added in [#1260]( https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1260) by [@wleczny](https://github.com/wleczny)

> ## Scala CLI is built using Scala 3.2.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scala CLI is now built with Scala 3.2.0
```

We now rely on Scala `3.2.0` as the default internal Scala version used to build the project.

> This changed was added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#1314](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1314)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change was added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#1314](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1314)
```

> ## Add resources support to Scala Native

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add resources support for Scala Native
```

> Scala CLI now allows embedding resources (by default) in a Scala Native binary for `--native` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scala CLI now allows embedding resources by default in a Scala Native binary with the `--native` flag.
```

```
$ cat resources/scala-native/foo.c 
int foo(int i) {
  return i + 42;
}
$ cat hello.scala 
//> using platform "native"
//> using resourceDir "resources"

import scalanative.unsafe.*

@extern
def foo(int: CInt): CInt = extern

@main def main =
  println(foo(3))
$ scala-cli hello.scala --native 
45
```

Added in [#812]( https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/812) by [@jchyb](https://github.com/jchyb)

> ##  Compact for `-e` and `--scalac-help`

Reviewer: The only "new" thing introduced by this change is that the `-e` flag (and also `--execute-scala`  and `--execute-java`) change the default sub-command from `repl` to `run` when no args are passed. And that's the only thing I'd explain here, really.

The rest of the changes, including the `--scalac-help` fix, are just cleanup after defaulting to the repl.
```suggestion
##  Default to the `run` sub-command instead of `repl` when the `-e`, `--execute-script`, `--execute-scala` or `--execute-java` options are passed.
```

> As we now default to the `repl` sub-command when no args are passed, the `-e` option requires special handling to backward compatible with current scala commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though we default to the `repl` sub-command when no arguments are passed to Scala CLI, an exception to that rule is when a snippet is passed with one of the following options: `-e`, `--execute-script`, `--execute-scala` or `--execute-java`. In that case, the passed snippets are treated as inputs to be executed and switch the default to the `run` sub-command.
```

```
$ scala-cli -e 'println("Hello")'
Hello
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

If you still want to pass a snippet to the `repl`, you can either pass the `repl` sub-command explicitly or use one of the following options, as before: `--script-snippet`, `--scala-snippet` or `--java-snippet`.

```
$ scala-cli --script-snippet 'println("Hello")'
Welcome to Scala 3.1.3 (17.0.2, Java OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM).
Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.
                                                                                                                                                             
scala> snippet_sc.main(Array.empty)
Hello
```

This change was introduced to make the `-e` option backwards compatible with the `scala` command.
````

Added in [#1313]( https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1313) by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao)

## Work in progress

> ### Experimental support for Markdown (experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Support for Markdown (experimental)
```

> The Scala CLI can accept now accepts a file `.md` and run/compile a snippet of code inside the markdown. Markdown sources are ignored by default unless passed explicitly as inputs. You can enable including non-explicit `.md` inputs by passing the `--enable-markdown` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scala CLI can now accept `.md` inputs and run/compile a snippet of Scala code inside the markdown. Markdown sources are ignored by default unless passed explicitly as inputs. You can also enable including non-explicit `.md` inputs by passing the `--enable-markdown` option.
```

Plain `scala` snippets are treated similarly to `.sc` scripts which can be run by `scala-cli`:

````markdown
$ cat Example.md
This is a simple example of an `.md` file with a Scala snippet.

```scala
val message = "Hello from Markdown"
println(message)
```
````

```
scala-cli Example.md
Hello from Markdown
```

> See [this document](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/blob/5f15ada41fbdcce9b9efd93bd63d513e3476a69a/website/docs/guides/markdown.md) for more details about these experimental  Markdown features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [this document](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/blob/5f15ada41fbdcce9b9efd93bd63d513e3476a69a/website/docs/guides/markdown.md) for more details about the experimental Markdown support.
```
